wiki/src/content/docs/contributing.mdx, before:

---
title: Contributing
---

[The standardml/twelf repository on
GitHub](https://github.com/standardml/twelf) contains both the source code for
Twelf and the code for this website.

Twelf, the software, is not under active development, and changes to the
code of Twelf are unlikely to be accepted unless you're working with Twelf's
original authors, [Frank Pfenning](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/) and [Carsten
Schürmann](https://www.itu.dk/people/carsten/).

This website, on the other hand, welcomes contributions through GitHub's 
[pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests)
mechanism. Any PRs that makes non-destructive changes to the website should
be quickly accepted, in keeping with the legacy of twelf.org as "The Twelf
Wiki."

## How to contribute

Any page under the `/wiki/` prefix of this website, for example
`twelf.org/wiki/abstract-syntax/`, corresponds to an Twelf file in the GitHub
repository, like [`wiki/pages/abstract-syntax.elf`](https://github.com/standardml/twelf/blob/main/wiki/pages/abstract-syntax.elf).

All `/wiki/` pages are written in [Wiki Twelf](/wiki-syntax/), which is a
hopefully-intuitive way of combining [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/)
with Twelf.

### Making small changes (using GitHub's editor)

There's a link from every `/wiki/` page that lets you view the Twelf code on
GitHub. If you're logged in to GitHub, you can click the pencil icon highlighted
below to edit the file:

![Viewing a Wiki Twelf file on GitHub](../../assets/github-view.png)

Once you've edited the file, the green "Commit changes" button will become
active.

![Editing a Wiki Twelf file on GitHub](../../assets/github-edit.png)

Clicking that "**Commit changes**" button will open a modal: you can ignore the
options and click the green button that says "**Propose changes**." That will
open a new page: ignore the options and click "**Create pull request**."

### Making bigger changes (running the site locally)

If you [check out the Twelf repository on
GitHub](https://github.com/standardml/twelf), you can preview the website by
running the following commands:

```bash
cd wiki
npm install
npm run dev
```

It's not necessary to build Twelf itself, though your local preview won't show
Twelf's responses if you don't build Twelf.

The development server is much more permissive than the actual static site
builder, which can be invoked with `npm run build`, and then viewed locally
with `npm run preview`.

## Code of conduct

Participation with the Twelf Wiki should be a harassment-free experience for
everyone, regardless of age, body size, visible or invisible disability,
ethnicity, sex characteristics, gender identity and expression, level of
experience, education, socio-economic status, nationality, personal appearance,
race, caste, color, religion, or sexual identity and orientation. Harrassing
behavior will lead to being blocked from contributing.

Please report any issues to [Rob Simmons](https://social.wub.site/@simrob). We
will not name harassment victims without their affirmative consent.

Commit message:

contributing and wiki syntax updates

wiki/src/content/docs/contributing.mdx, after:

---
title: Contributing
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets";
import githubView from "../../assets/github-view.png";
import githubEdit from "../../assets/github-edit.png";

[The standardml/twelf repository on
GitHub](https://github.com/standardml/twelf) contains both the source code for
Twelf and the code for this website.

Twelf, the software, is not under active development, and changes to the
code of Twelf are unlikely to be accepted unless you're working with Twelf's
original authors, [Frank Pfenning](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/) and [Carsten
Schürmann](https://www.itu.dk/people/carsten/).

This website, on the other hand, welcomes contributions through GitHub's
[pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests)
mechanism. Any PRs that makes non-destructive changes to the website should
be quickly accepted, in keeping with the legacy of twelf.org as "The Twelf
Wiki."

## How to contribute

Any page under the `/wiki/` prefix of this website, for example
`twelf.org/wiki/abstract-syntax/`, corresponds to an Twelf file in the GitHub
repository, like [`wiki/pages/abstract-syntax.elf`](https://github.com/standardml/twelf/blob/main/wiki/pages/abstract-syntax.elf).

All `/wiki/` pages are written in [Wiki Twelf](/wiki-syntax/), which is a
hopefully-intuitive way of combining [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/)
with Twelf.

### Making small changes (using GitHub's editor)

There's a link from every `/wiki/` page that lets you view the Twelf code on
GitHub. If you're logged in to GitHub, you can click the pencil icon highlighted
below to edit the file:

<Image
  src={githubView}
  alt="Viewing a Wiki Twelf file on GitHub"
  style="border: 1px solid black;"
/>

Once you've edited the file, the green "Commit changes" button will become
active.

<Image
  src={githubEdit}
  alt="Editing a Wiki Twelf file on GitHub"
  style="border: 1px solid black;"
/>

Clicking that "**Commit changes**" button will open a modal: you can ignore the
options and click the green button that says "**Propose changes**." That will
open a new page: ignore the options and click "**Create pull request**."

### Making bigger changes (running the site locally)

If you [check out the Twelf repository on
GitHub](https://github.com/standardml/twelf), you can preview the website by
running the following commands:

```bash
cd wiki
npm install
npm run dev
```

It's not necessary to build Twelf itself, though your local preview won't show
Twelf's responses if you don't build Twelf.

The development server is much more permissive than the actual static site
builder, which can be invoked with `npm run build`, and then viewed locally
with `npm run preview`.

## Code of conduct

Participation with the Twelf Wiki should be a harassment-free experience for
everyone, regardless of age, body size, visible or invisible disability,
ethnicity, sex characteristics, gender identity and expression, level of
experience, education, socio-economic status, nationality, personal appearance,
race, caste, color, religion, or sexual identity and orientation. Harrassing
behavior will lead to being blocked from contributing.

Please report any issues to [Rob Simmons](https://social.wub.site/@simrob). We
will not name harassment victims without their affirmative consent.
