wiki/src/content/docs/index.mdx, before:

---
title: The Twelf Project
---

import Twelf from '../../components/Twelf.astro';

[Twelf](/wiki/about-the-twelf-project/) is a language used to specify,
implement, and prove properties of deductive systems such as programming
languages and logics. [Large research projects using
Twelf](/wiki/research-projects-using-twelf/) include the TALT typed assembly
language, a foundational proof-carrying-code system, and a type safety proof
for Standard ML. Twelf is no longer undergoing active development, but it
retains a community of users and remains a valuable tool for research.

Here's what it looks like to write Twelf:

<Twelf code={`
exp : type.
app : exp -> exp -> exp.
lam : (exp -> exp) -> exp.

step : exp -> exp -> type.
step/app : step (app (lam [x] E0 x) E2) (E0 E2).
`}/>

Here's what it looks like to run Twelf:

<Twelf checked context={`
exp : type.
app : exp -> exp -> exp.
lam : (exp -> exp) -> exp.

step : exp -> exp -> type.
step/app : step (app (lam [x] E0 x) E2) (E0 E2).
`} code={`
omega = app (lam [x] app x x) (lam [x] app x x).
%query 1 1 step omega E.
`}/>

Visitors without a technical background are encouraged to read the [general
description of Twelf](/wiki/general-description-of-twelf/).

- The [installation instructions](/download/) can get you started.
- [Proving metatheorems with Twelf](/wiki/proving-metatheorems-with-twelf/) is
  a mini-course on some of the most common ways of using Twelf.
- The [glossary](/wiki/glossary/) and [documentation hub](/wiki/documentation/)
  are the most up-to-date documentation for Twelf.

This website is home of Twelf language _and_ the home for lots of Twelf-centric
tutorials on logic and programming languages. See the [case studies
hub](/wiki/case-studies/) for more. Don't be shy about
[contributing](/contributing/) to our documentation or adding your own
tutorials or case studies!

This website is still in the process of being converted from the MediaWiki
installation that ran from 2006-2024, and there is [much to do](/todo/). We'd
welcome your help!

Commit message:

maint: update npm deps, remove wiki/main-page, update home page (#67)
There seems to be some priority issue with render's rewrites, attempt to
prevent it from showing wiki/main-page, which has outdated content, by
deleting the page.

wiki/src/content/docs/index.mdx, after:

---
title: The Twelf Project
description: Twelf is a language used to specify, implement, and prove properties of deductive systems such as programming languages and logics.
head:
  - tag: title
    content: The Twelf Programming Language and Theorem Prover
---

import Twelf from '../../components/Twelf.astro';

[Twelf](/wiki/about-the-twelf-project/) is a language used to specify,
implement, and prove properties of deductive systems such as programming
languages and logics. [Large research projects using
Twelf](/wiki/research-projects-using-twelf/) include the TALT typed assembly
language, a foundational proof-carrying-code system, and a type safety proof
for Standard ML. Twelf is no longer undergoing active development, but it
retains a community of users and remains a valuable tool for research.

Here's what it looks like to write Twelf:

<Twelf code={`
exp : type.
app : exp -> exp -> exp.
lam : (exp -> exp) -> exp.

step : exp -> exp -> type.
step/app : step (app (lam [x] E0 x) E2) (E0 E2).
`}/>

Here's what it looks like to run Twelf:

<Twelf checked context={`
exp : type.
app : exp -> exp -> exp.
lam : (exp -> exp) -> exp.

step : exp -> exp -> type.
step/app : step (app (lam [x] E0 x) E2) (E0 E2).
`} code={`
omega = app (lam [x] app x x) (lam [x] app x x).
%query 1 1 step omega E.
`}/>

Visitors without a technical background are encouraged to read the [general
description of Twelf](/wiki/general-description-of-twelf/).

- The [installation instructions](/download/) can get you started.
- [Proving metatheorems with Twelf](/wiki/proving-metatheorems-with-twelf/) is
  a mini-course on some of the most common ways of using Twelf.
- The [glossary](/wiki/glossary/) and [documentation hub](/wiki/documentation/)
  are the most up-to-date documentation for Twelf.

This website is home of Twelf language _and_ the home for lots of Twelf-centric
tutorials on logic and programming languages. See the [case studies
hub](/wiki/case-studies/) for more. Don't be shy about
[contributing](/contributing/) to our documentation or adding your own
tutorials or case studies!

This website is still in the process of being converted from the "old Twelf 
wiki," the MediaWiki installation that ran from 2006-2024, and there is 
[much to do](/todo/). We'd welcome your help!
