wiki/src/content/docs/wiki-syntax.mdx, before:

---
title: Syntax for Wiki Twelf pages
---

import Twelf from "../../components/Twelf.astro";
import Math from "../../components/Math.astro";
import Guide from "../../components/Guide.astro";
import Keyword from "../../components/Keyword.astro";
import Todo from "../../components/Todo.astro";

This website runs off of the [Astro Starlight](https://starlight.astro.build/)
static site generator, which builds the website from markdown files (`.md`)
and [extended markdown](https://mdxjs.com/) files (`.mdx`).

All the files under the `/wiki/` prefix on this website are written as
Wiki Twelf files, which are also valid Twelf files with the `.elf` extension,
in the `/wiki/src/content/twelf/` directory of the Twelf repository. When
building the website, the converter script `/wiki/elf-to-mdx.mjs` takes these
Wiki Twelf files and creates files in the `/wiki/src/content/docs/wiki/*.mdx`
directory that are actually what the static site generator sees.

The goal is for the converter to be a fairly minimal state machine that
someone could code up again in an hour or so to retarget the wiki's `.elf`
files to some other markdown-ish target in the future.

## High level structure of a Twelf wiki file

Here's a simple Wiki Twelf file:

<Twelf code={`
%%! title: A simple Wiki Twelf file

%{! Here's code that defines the natural numbers: either zero \`z\`
or \`s N\`, the successor of the natural number \`z\`. !}%

nat : type.
z : nat.
s : nat -> nat.

%{! ## Level two heading !}%

%{! The [\`%freeze\`](/wiki/percent-freeze) declaration freezes. !}%
%freeze nat.
`} />

This will get turned by the `/wiki/elf-to-mdx.mjs` script into the following
extended markdown file that the Astro Starlight SSG understands.`

```mdx
---
title: A simple Wiki Twelf file
---

import Twelf from "../../../components/Twelf.astro";

Here's code that defines the natural numbers: either zero `z`
or `s N`, the successor of the natural number `z`.

<Twelf
  code={`
nat : type.
z : nat.
s : nat -> nat.
`}
/>

## Level two heading

The [`%freeze`](/wiki/percent-freeze) declaration freezes.
```

A Wiki Twelf file begins with a series of lines beginning with `%%!` that
directly become the frontmatter of the output file.

Then, the rest of the parser turns the file "inside out", making special
comments --- beginning with `%{!` at the beginning of a line and ending with
`!}%` at the end of a line, possibly the same line --- into Markdown text, and
turning everything else into Twelf.

An empty section of Twelf between two markup sections will be ignored. An
empty section of Markdown between two Twelf sections will cause a break
in the Twelf.

## Recognized behavior within Twelf sections

Within a Twelf section, code within `%{!! begin checked !!}%` and
`%{!! end checked !!}%` lines will be displayed on the wiki along with
the Twelf output of running that code in context.

<Twelf
  code={`
%{!! begin checked !!}%
three: nat = (s (s (s z))).
%{!! end checked !!}%
`}
/>

This code will be checked in the context of the Twelf code in the page up to
that point.

<Twelf
  checked
  context={`
nat : type.
z : nat.
s : nat -> nat.
`}
  code={`
three: nat = (s (s (s z))).
`}
/>

Within a Twelf section, code within `%{!! begin hidden !!}%` and
`%{!! end hidden !!}%` lines will be omitted from the wiki, while remaining
part of the overall Twelf document.

<Twelf
  code={`
%{!! begin hidden !!}%
% These declarations are necessary but would interrupt
% the flow of the page if we showed them in the wiki text:
nat : type.
times : nat -> nat -> nat.
%{!! end hidden !!}%
`}
/>

## Recognized behavior within Markdown sections

Within Markdown sections, centered math in non indented ` ```math `
blocks is recognized:

<pre set:text={`
\`\`\`math
\\bigvee_i \\mathcal{C}_i
\`\`\`
`} />

It's possible to display syntax-highlighted Twelf code that doesn't appear in
the regular flow of the document:

<pre set:text={`
\`\`\`twelf
% Don't do this, it will run forever:
loop : type.
fix : loop <- loop.
%solve x : loop.
\`\`\`
`} />

It's also possible to display checked Twelf code that shows its response:

<pre set:text={`
\`\`\`checkedtwelf
% This won't work at all.
nat : type.
%trustme nat -> nat = nat -> nat.
\`\`\`
`} />

These commands are important because they allow the wiki page itself to work as
a complete Twelf file that loads correctly in Twelf, while still being able to
contain, in what are effectively Twelf comments, non-running code examples. 

### Supported Astro components 

The Astro static site generator supports adding additional features using
[components](https://docs.astro.build/en/basics/astro-components/). The
following components are imported into every Wiki Twelf file and can be used
as needed in text:

 * `<Math>` components display inline math: 
   `<Math formula="e^{\pi \cdot i} = -1" />` renders as 
   <Math formula="e^{\pi \cdot i} = -1" />
 * `<Guide>` components display links to the pre-wiki Twelf documentation:
   `"<Guide chapter="6" section="32">Constraint domains</Guide>"`
   renders as
   "<Guide chapter="6" section="32">Constraint domains</Guide>"
 * `<Todo>` components display as red non-links, like this-page-does-not-exist
   links in MediaWiki software: `<Todo>Reversing the polarity</Todo>` renders
   as <Todo>Reversing the polarity</Todo>
 * `<Keyword>` components appear at the bottom of pages that describe Twelf
   directives: see the page for [`%covers`](/wiki/percent-covers/) for an
   example, which uses `<Keyword name="covers"/> 

Do not use `<Twelf>` or `<DisplayMath>` components in Wiki Twelf pages: 
these should only be introduced to Wiki Twelf pages by translating Twelf code
or from translating ```` ```twelf ````, ```` ```checkedtwelf ````, or
```` ```math ```` blocks. Avoid importing additional components into specific
Wiki Twelf pages: if more components are called for, they should be imported
globally by editing the `elf-to-mdx.mjs` script.

Commit message:

Update docs and make Twelf component able to read from cached files

wiki/src/content/docs/wiki-syntax.mdx, after:

---
title: Syntax for Wiki Twelf pages
---

import Twelf from "../../components/Twelf.astro";
import Math from "../../components/Math.astro";
import Guide from "../../components/Guide.astro";
import Keyword from "../../components/Keyword.astro";
import Todo from "../../components/Todo.astro";

This website runs off of the [Astro Starlight](https://starlight.astro.build/)
static site generator, which builds the website from markdown files (`.md`)
and [extended markdown](https://mdxjs.com/) files (`.mdx`).

All the files under the `/wiki/` prefix on this website are written as
Wiki Twelf files, which are also valid Twelf files with the `.elf` extension,
in the `/wiki/src/content/twelf/` directory of the Twelf repository. When
building the website, the converter script `/wiki/elf-to-mdx.mjs` takes these
Wiki Twelf files and creates files in the `/wiki/src/content/docs/wiki/*.mdx`
directory that are actually what the static site generator sees.

The goal is for the converter to be a fairly minimal state machine that
someone could code up again in an hour or so to retarget the wiki's `.elf`
files to some other markdown-ish target in the future.

## High level structure of a Twelf wiki file

Here's a simple Wiki Twelf file:

<Twelf code={`
%%! title: A simple Wiki Twelf file

%{! Here's code that defines the natural numbers: either zero \`z\`
or \`s N\`, the successor of the natural number \`z\`. !}%

nat : type.
z : nat.
s : nat -> nat.

%{! ## Level two heading !}%

%{! The [\`%freeze\`](/wiki/percent-freeze) declaration freezes. !}%
%freeze nat.
`} />

This will get turned by the `/wiki/elf-to-mdx.mjs` script into the following
extended markdown file that the Astro Starlight SSG understands.`

```mdx
---
title: A simple Wiki Twelf file
---

import Twelf from "../../../components/Twelf.astro";

Here's code that defines the natural numbers: either zero `z`
or `s N`, the successor of the natural number `z`.

<Twelf
  code={`
nat : type.
z : nat.
s : nat -> nat.
`}
/>

## Level two heading

The [`%freeze`](/wiki/percent-freeze) declaration freezes.
```

A Wiki Twelf file begins with a series of lines beginning with `%%!` that
directly become the frontmatter of the output file.

Then, the rest of the parser turns the file "inside out", making special
comments --- beginning with `%{!` at the beginning of a line and ending with
`!}%` at the end of a line, possibly the same line --- into Markdown text, and
turning everything else into Twelf.

An empty section of Twelf between two markup sections will be ignored. An
empty section of Markdown between two Twelf sections will cause a break
in the Twelf.

## Recognized behavior within Twelf sections

Within a Twelf section, code within `%{!! begin checked !!}%` and
`%{!! end checked !!}%` lines will be displayed on the wiki along with
the Twelf output of running that code in context.

<Twelf
  code={`
%{!! begin checked !!}%
three: nat = (s (s (s z))).
%{!! end checked !!}%
`}
/>

This code will be checked in the context of the Twelf code in the page up to
that point.

<Twelf
  checked
  context={`
nat : type.
z : nat.
s : nat -> nat.
`}
  code={`
three: nat = (s (s (s z))).
`}
/>

Within a Twelf section, code within `%{!! begin hidden !!}%` and
`%{!! end hidden !!}%` lines will be omitted from the wiki, while remaining
part of the overall Twelf document.

<Twelf
  code={`
%{!! begin hidden !!}%
% These declarations are necessary but would interrupt
% the flow of the page if we showed them in the wiki text:
nat : type.
times : nat -> nat -> nat.
%{!! end hidden !!}%
`}
/>

### Extra `<Twelf/>` options

The context for Twelf is used for two purposes: to inform the code that is loaded 
into the editor when you click on the hat, and to inform the configuration sent to
the Twelf Live editor when you click on the hat.

This can get very large and redundant in an automatically translated file with lots
of Twelf sections, so these two purposes can be individually modified.

If the parameter `contextFile` is passed instead of `context`, then the static site 
generator, when dealing with the Twelf component, context will read from the file.
This allows the configured MDX files to be much smaller, but can still lead to large
HTML assets, as the HTML assets will include the context in the "hat" links.

## Recognized behavior within Markdown sections

Within Markdown sections, centered math in non indented ` ```math `
blocks is recognized:

<pre set:text={`
\`\`\`math
\\bigvee_i \\mathcal{C}_i
\`\`\`
`} />

It's possible to display syntax-highlighted Twelf code that doesn't appear in
the regular flow of the document:

<pre set:text={`
\`\`\`twelf
% Don't do this, it will run forever:
loop : type.
fix : loop <- loop.
%solve x : loop.
\`\`\`
`} />

It's also possible to display checked Twelf code that shows its response:

<pre set:text={`
\`\`\`checkedtwelf
% This won't work at all.
nat : type.
%trustme nat -> nat = nat -> nat.
\`\`\`
`} />

These commands are important because they allow the wiki page itself to work as
a complete Twelf file that loads correctly in Twelf, while still being able to
contain, in what are effectively Twelf comments, non-running code examples. 

### Supported Astro components 

The Astro static site generator supports adding additional features using
[components](https://docs.astro.build/en/basics/astro-components/). The
following components are imported into every Wiki Twelf file and can be used
as needed in text:

 * `<Math>` components display inline math: 
   `<Math formula="e^{\pi \cdot i} = -1" />` renders as 
   <Math formula="e^{\pi \cdot i} = -1" />
 * `<Guide>` components display links to the pre-wiki Twelf documentation:
   `"<Guide chapter="6" section="32">Constraint domains</Guide>"`
   renders as
   "<Guide chapter="6" section="32">Constraint domains</Guide>"
 * `<Todo>` components display as red non-links, like this-page-does-not-exist
   links in MediaWiki software: `<Todo>Reversing the polarity</Todo>` renders
   as <Todo>Reversing the polarity</Todo>
 * `<Keyword>` components appear at the bottom of pages that describe Twelf
   directives: see the page for [`%covers`](/wiki/percent-covers/) for an
   example, which uses `<Keyword name="covers"/> 

Do not use `<Twelf>` or `<DisplayMath>` components in Wiki Twelf pages: 
these should only be introduced to Wiki Twelf pages by translating Twelf code
or from translating ```` ```twelf ````, ```` ```checkedtwelf ````, or
```` ```math ```` blocks. Avoid importing additional components into specific
Wiki Twelf pages: if more components are called for, they should be imported
globally by editing the `elf-to-mdx.mjs` script.
